
Covariance and correlation are basic measures describing the relationship between
two variables. They are a broad class of statistical tools which evaluate how
two variables are related with dependence or association, especially for linear
relationship. Difference between the two is that covariance is calculated under
the original units of two variables, while correlation is obtained based on standardized
scale resulting in a unit-less measure.


COVARIANCE

Covariance is defined as the expected value of variations of two variables from their
expected values. More simply, covariance measures how much variables change together.
The mean of each variable is used as reference and relative positions of observations 
compared to mean is important. Covariance is simply defined as the mean of multiplication
of corresponding X and Y deviations from their mean.



Then what can we say about the size of covariance values? Magnitude of the relationship? 
However, the problem is that the absolute value of covariance depends on the unit of variables. 
For example, if we change the unit of a variable from kilometer to meter unit, then the 
deviance from mean of 1 in kilometer units (km) is changed into 1,000 in meter units (m). 
The unit change makes huge difference in the value of covariance, even when the relationship 
of 2 variables is the same. Therefore, the size of covariance value cannot be interpretable 
as the magnitude of a relationship. Also, a covariance value has neither upper or lower bound 
nor any standard to determine the degree of relationship. There is a need of unit standardization 
procedure on covariance.



PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENT


Correlation is the standardized form of covariance by dividing the covariance with 
SD of each variable under normal distribution assumption. Generally, we use ‘r’ as 
sample correlation coefficient and ‘ρ’ as population correlation coefficient. The Pearson 
correlation coefficient has following formula.


The Pearson correlation coefficient is also the covariance of standardized form of X and Y 
variables. The correlation coefficient is unit-less, being independent of the scale of variables 
and the range is between −1 and +1. The interpretation of the Pearson correlation coefficient 
was provided by Cohen [1]. He proposed a small, medium, and large effect size of r as 0.1, 0.3, 
and 0.5, respectively, and explained that the medium effect size represents an effect likely to 
be visible to the naked eye of a careful observer. Also he subjectively set a small effect size 
to be noticeably smaller than medium but not so small as to be trivial and set a large effect size 
to be the same distance above the medium as small was below it [1]. His standard is generally 
accepted at the present.